---
title: "viash 0.3.1"
date: 2021-01-26
parent: Version history
---

View the full changelog
[here](https://github.com/data-intuitive/viash/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md).

## NEW FEATURES

  - Functionality: Added list of authors field. Example:

<!-- end list -->

``` yaml
functionality:
  authors:
    - name: Bob Cando
      roles: [maintainer, author]
      email: bob@cando.com
      props: {github: bobcando, orcid: XXXAAABBB}
```

  - Docker Platform: Allow specifying the registry with
    `target_registry`. Example:

<!-- end list -->

``` yaml
- type: docker
  image: bash:4.0
  target_registry: foo.io
  target_image: bar
  target_tag: 0.1
```

  - Docker Platform: `version` is now a synonym for `target_tag`. If
    both `version` and `target_tag` are not defined,
    `functionality.version` will be used instead.

  - Docker Platform: Can change the Docker Setup Strategy by specifying
    
      - in the yaml: `setup_strategy: xxx`
      - on command-line: `---docker_setup_strategy xxx` or `---dss xxx`
    
    Allowed values for the setup strategy are:
    
      - alwaysbuild / build: build the image from the dockerfile
        (DEFAULT)
      - alwayscachedbuild / cachedbuild: build the image from the
        dockerfile, with caching
      - alwayspull / pull: pull the image from a registry
      - alwayspullelsebuild / pullelsebuild: try to pull the image from
        a registry, else build it
      - alwayspullelsecachedbuild / pullelsecachedbuild: try to pull the
        image from a registry, else build it with caching
      - ifneedbebuild: if the image does not exist locally, build the
        image
      - ifneedbecachedbuild: if the image does not exist locally, build
        the image with caching
      - ifneedbepull: if the image does not exist locally, pull the
        image
      - ifneedbepullelsebuild: if the image does not exist locally, pull
        the image else build it
      - ifneedbepullelsecachedbuild: if the image does not exist
        locally, pull the image else build it with caching
      - donothing / meh: do not build or pull anything

## MAJOR CHANGES

  - License: viash is now licensed under GPL-3.

## MINOR CHANGES

  - CLI: Allow parameters before and after specifying a viash config
    yaml. For example, both following commands now work. Up until now,
    only the latter would work.
    
      - `viash run config.vsh.yaml -p docker`
      - `viash run -p docker config.vsh.yaml`

  - Functionality: Arguments field can now be omitted.

  - Scripts: Wrapped scripts now contain a minimal header at the top.

## BUG FIXES

  - `NXF viash build`: Do not assume each config yaml has at least one
    test.

  - Scripts: Fix Docker `chown` failing when multiple outputs are
    defined (\#21).

  - JavaScriptRequirements: Fix type getting set to “python” when
    unparsing.

  - `viash run . ---debug`: Debug session should now work again

  - Native `---setup`: Fix missing newlines when running native —setup
    commands.

  - Main: Fix crashing when no arguments are supplied.

  - Namespace: Show error message when the config file can’t be parsed.

  - Executable resource: Fix Docker automount handling for Executable
    resources.

## TESTING

  - YAML: Test invertibility of parsing/unparsing config objects.
