---
title: "viash 0.3.0"
date: 2020-11-24
parent: Version history
---

View the full changelog
[here](https://github.com/data-intuitive/viash/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md).

## BREAKING CHANGES

  - File format `functionality.yaml` is no longer supported. Use
    `config.vsh.yaml` or `script.vsh.R/py/...` instead.

  - `viash run` and `viash test`: By default, temporary files are
    removed when the execution succeeded, otherwise they are kept. This
    behaviour can be overridden by specifying `--keep true` to always
    keep the temporary files, and `--keep false` to always remove them.

  - `NXF`: `function_type: todir` now returns the output directory on
    the `Channel` rather than its contents.

## NEW FEATURES

  - Added `viash ns test`: Run all tests in a particular namespace. For
    each test, the exit code and duration is reported. Results can be
    written to a tsv file.
  - Added support for JavaScript scripts.
  - Added support for Scala scripts.
  - \[NXF\] publishing has a few more options:
      - `publish`: Publish or yes (default is false)
      - `per_id`: Publish results in directories containing the unique
        (sample) ID (default is true)
      - `path`: A prefix path for the results to be published (default
        is empty)
  - Functionality resources and tests: Allow copying whole directories
    instead of only single files. Also allow to rename the destination
    folder by specifying a value for ‘dest’.
  - Platform R / Python dependencies: Allow running a simple command.

## MAJOR CHANGES

  - The `-P <platform>` parameter will be deprecated. For now, all `-P`
    values are simply passed to `-p`.
  - `viash ns build` and `viash ns test`: Now use all available
    platforms if `-p` is not specified.
  - By default, python packages will not be installed as user. Use
    `user: true` to modify this behaviour.

## MINOR CHANGES

  - Name of autogenerated Docker image is now `ns/tool`.
  - Internal changes to make it easier to extend viash with more
    scripting languages.
  - `NXF`: Default image is now `ns/tool` for consistency.
  - `NXF`: Repurpose `asis` function type for having simple publishing
    steps (see docs).
  - `NXF`: Add component name to main `process` name
  - R dependencies: by default, do not reinstall Bioconductor packages.
    Set `bioc_force_install: true` to revert this behaviour.

## BUG FIXES

  - `viash build`: Do not display error messages when pwd is not a git
    repository.

## TESTING

  - `viash test`: Add tests for `viash test` functionality.
