---
title: "viash v0.2.0"
parent: Versions
---

## NEW FEATURES

* Allow (optional) version attributes in `functionality.yaml` and `platform.yaml`.
* Allow testing a component with the `viash test` functionality. Tests are executed in a temporary directory on the specified platform. The temporary directory contains all the resource and test files. 
* `viash --version`: Add flag for printing the version of viash.
* Allow fetching resources from URL (http:// and https://)
* Allow retrieving functionality and platform YAMLs from URL.
* For docker containers, autoresolve path names of files. Use `---v path:path` or `---volume path:path` to manually mount a specific folder.
* Implement parameter multiplicity. 
  Set `multiple: true` to denote an argument to have higher multiplicity. 
  Run `./cmd --foo one --foo two --foo three:four` in order for multiple values to be added to the same parameter list.
* Added a new format for defining functionality in which the user passes the script in which the functionality and platforms are listed as yaml headers.

## MAJOR CHANGES
* Remove passthrough parameters.
* Since CLI generation is now performed in the outer script, `viash pimp` has been deprecated.
* (WIP) Write out meta.yaml containing viash run information as well as the original `functionality.yaml` and `platform.yaml` content.

## MINOR CHANGES
* `viash run` and `viash test`: Allow changing the temporary directory by defining `VIASH_TEMP` as a environment variable. Temporary directories are cleaned up after successful executions.
* `viash run` and `viash test`: Exit(1) when execution or test fails.
* `viash export`: Add -m flag for outputting metadata after export.
* `viash run`: Required parameters can have a default value now. Produce error when a required parameter is not passed, even when a default is provided.

## BUG FIXES
* NXF: Correctly escape path variable when running NXF command.
* NXF: Surround parameters with quotes when running NXF command.

## INTERNAL CHANGES
* Move CLI from inner script to outer script.
* Renamed Target to Platform
* Renamed Environment to Requirements
